README.rst, before:

=======================
nethserver-subscription
=======================

Manage NethServer Subscription clients

* Monitor the machine using Collectd and route notifications to a remote server
* Collect and send server informations to a remote server
* Download and install RPM updates automatically by configuring YUM repositories and nethserver-yum-cron

Database
========

Configuration is stored inside the ``configuration`` database under the ``subscription`` key.

Properties:

- ``AlertsUrl``: URL used to send alerts and heartbeat
- ``AlertsAutoUpdates``: if set to ``enabled``, custom alerts will be downloaded each night from ``AlertsAutoUpdatesUrl``.
- ``AlertsAutoUpdatesUrl``: URL used to fetch custom alerts database
- ``ApiUrl``: URL called from the UI to retrieve subscription plan informations
- ``InventoryUrl``: API endpoint where the data are sent
- ``NsRelease``: exact NethServer release request to mirrorlist
- ``Secret``: sysem secret key generated by Dartagnan (https://github.com/nethesis/dartagnan)
- ``PricingUrl``: URL used from the UI to access the subscription plans
- ``SystemId``: system unique id
- ``SiteUrl``: Product website URL
- ``DocsUrl``: Product documentation URL
- ``HelpdeskUrl``: Product helpdesk URL

Example: ::

 subscription=configuration
    AlertsAutoUpdates=enabled
    AlertsUrl=https://my.nethserver.com/api/
    ApiUrl=http://my.nethserver.com/api/
    InventoryUrl=http://my.nethserver.com/api/inventories/store/
    NsRelease=7.4.1708
    Secret=xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
    PricingUrl=https://my.nethserver.com/?action=newServer
    SystemId=xxxxxxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx
    SiteUrl=https://www.nethserver.org/
    DocsUrl=http://docs.nethserver.org/
    HelpdeskUrl=https://community.nethserver.org/


Configuration
=============

* **NethServer Subscriptions** (by Nethesis) -- run

  ::

    config setprop subscription AlertsUrl https://my.nethserver.com/api/machine/
    config delprop subscription AlertsAutoUpdatesUrl
    config setprop subscription InventoryUrl https://my.nethserver.com/api/machine/inventories/store/
    signal-event nethserver-subscription-update

* **NethServer Enterprise partner program** (by Nethesis) -- run

  ::

    config setprop subscription AlertsUrl https://my.nethesis.it/isa/
    config setprop subscription AlertsAutoUpdatesUrl https://my.nethesis.it/api/
    config setprop subscription InventoryUrl https://my.nethesis.it/isa/inventory/store/
    signal-event nethserver-subscription-update


YUM repositories
================

Once NethServer Subscriptions is activated, YUM configuration is changed to
contact the subscribed repositories.
Every night the list of enabled repositores will be reset to meet the subscription requirements.

The ``/etc/e-smith/events/actions/nethserver-subscription-eorepo`` action configures YUM 
repositories based on subscription.
The behavior of the script can be changed using ``/etc/nethserver/eorepo.conf`` file which 
may contain the list of repositories to be enabled.

Restore original NethServer repositories
----------------------------------------

To revert the system configuration to its
initial state and use the original NethServer repositories run ::

  config setprop subscription SystemId '' Secret ''
  signal-event software-repos-save

Events
======

* ``nethserver-subscription-update`` standard update event; it runs on new 
  installation and subsequent updates
* ``nethserver-subscription-save`` runs when the registration token is set from 
  the UI, altering the YUM repository configuration
* ``restore-yumrepos`` runs during ``pre-restore-config`` event. Actions and
  templates bound to it run in a temporary environment where the
  ``configuration`` DB is extracted from the configuration backup and temporarily
  applied to the system. It occurs before automatic installation of packages 
  from the backup set. It is the point where the YUM configuration is restored to 
  make subscribed repositories immediately available.


Alerts
======

Collectd listens for notification on a well known socket: ``/var/run/collectd.sock``.

Notifications can be generated by Collectd thresholds, cron jobs or even external daemons like *NMS*.

Collectd thresholds
-------------------

You can trigger an alarm named ``testalarm`` from command line: ::

  echo -e "PUTNOTIF host=$(hostname) type=custom type_instance=testalarm severity=failure time=$(date +%s) message=\"$1 FAILURE\"" | nc -U /var/run/collectd.sock &>/dev/null

You can also resolve the above alarm: ::

  echo -e "PUTNOTIF host=$(hostname) type=custom type_instance=testalarm severity=okay time=$(date +%s) message=\"$1 OK\"" | nc -U /var/run/collectd.sock &>/dev/null


Adding a threshold configuration
--------------------------------

Create a ``/etc/collectd.d/threshold.conf`` template fragment using collectd threshold syntax. Enjoy collectd docs here https://collectd.org/documentation/manpages/collectd-threshold.5.shtml


Collectd python plugin
----------------------

The `nethserver_alerts.py` file implements a Collectd plugin. 
The plugin dispatches each notification to remote Dartagnan instance.
If the remote Dartagnan instance is not available, the plugin will save the notifications inside a local queue
and will retry to resend them later.

Plugin options (inside ``/etc/collectd.d/threshold.conf``):

- ``api_url`` URL where alerts will be dispatched
- ``lk``: System ID
- ``secret``: (optional) if set, the secret will be used as authorization token
- ``debug``: enable the debug, can be ``yes`` or ``no``. Default to ``no``


NethServer Monitor Services (NMS)
---------------------------------

NMS is a python daemon which monitor the status of all services registered inside the configuration db.
Each service is checked every 300 seconds, if the status of a service changes, NMS writes a notification to Collectd socket.


Inventory
=========

The inventory uses the ``facter`` software, from puppet
(https://docs.puppet.com/facter/). Facter collects a standard set of
informations (like CPU model, runing kernel, etc.) but the system also gather
some custom ``facts``.

Custom facts
------------

Scripts for custom facts are inside
``/opt/puppetlabs/puppet/lib/ruby/2.1.0/facter/`` directory. Each package can
register a new custom fact, but this packages always provides the following:

- ``rpms``, list of installed RPMs
- ``raid``, RAID configuration
- ``templates_custom``, list of configured template custom wihout content
- ``arp_macs``, number of network devices
- ``users``, list of configured users
- ``backup``, info about backup status
- ``esmithdb``, all esmith databases, password values are replaced with ``***``

Sending the inventory
---------------------

Make sure that ``SystemId`` property under ``subscription`` key is already set.
If the ``Secret`` property is set, it will be used as authorization token when
sending the inventory.

The inventory will be sent every day using cron. If you want to manually send
the inventory, use the following command: ::

  /etc/cron.daily/nethserver-inventory

Commit message:

Readme updated for extra repositories

README.rst, after:

=======================
nethserver-subscription
=======================

Manage NethServer Subscription clients

* Monitor the machine using Collectd and route notifications to a remote server
* Collect and send server informations to a remote server
* Download and install RPM updates automatically by configuring YUM repositories and nethserver-yum-cron

Database
========

Configuration is stored inside the ``configuration`` database under the ``subscription`` key.

Properties:

- ``AlertsUrl``: URL used to send alerts and heartbeat
- ``AlertsAutoUpdates``: if set to ``enabled``, custom alerts will be downloaded each night from ``AlertsAutoUpdatesUrl``.
- ``AlertsAutoUpdatesUrl``: URL used to fetch custom alerts database
- ``ApiUrl``: URL called from the UI to retrieve subscription plan informations
- ``InventoryUrl``: API endpoint where the data are sent
- ``NsRelease``: exact NethServer release request to mirrorlist
- ``Secret``: sysem secret key generated by Dartagnan (https://github.com/nethesis/dartagnan)
- ``PricingUrl``: URL used from the UI to access the subscription plans
- ``SystemId``: system unique id
- ``SiteUrl``: Product website URL
- ``DocsUrl``: Product documentation URL
- ``HelpdeskUrl``: Product helpdesk URL
- ``ExtraRepositories``: Enable extra repositories in the subscription (comma separated : nethforge,repoA,repoB).

Example: ::

 subscription=configuration
    AlertsAutoUpdates=enabled
    AlertsUrl=https://my.nethserver.com/api/
    ApiUrl=http://my.nethserver.com/api/
    InventoryUrl=http://my.nethserver.com/api/inventories/store/
    NsRelease=7.4.1708
    Secret=xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
    PricingUrl=https://my.nethserver.com/?action=newServer
    SystemId=xxxxxxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx
    SiteUrl=https://www.nethserver.org/
    DocsUrl=http://docs.nethserver.org/
    HelpdeskUrl=https://community.nethserver.org/


Configuration
=============

* **NethServer Subscriptions** (by Nethesis) -- run

  ::

    config setprop subscription AlertsUrl https://my.nethserver.com/api/machine/
    config delprop subscription AlertsAutoUpdatesUrl
    config setprop subscription InventoryUrl https://my.nethserver.com/api/machine/inventories/store/
    signal-event nethserver-subscription-update

* **NethServer Enterprise partner program** (by Nethesis) -- run

  ::

    config setprop subscription AlertsUrl https://my.nethesis.it/isa/
    config setprop subscription AlertsAutoUpdatesUrl https://my.nethesis.it/api/
    config setprop subscription InventoryUrl https://my.nethesis.it/isa/inventory/store/
    signal-event nethserver-subscription-update


YUM repositories
================

Once NethServer Subscriptions is activated, YUM configuration is changed to
contact the subscribed repositories.
Every night the list of enabled repositores will be reset to meet the subscription requirements.

The ``/etc/e-smith/events/actions/nethserver-subscription-eorepo`` action configures YUM 
repositories based on subscription.
The behavior of the script can be changed using ``/etc/nethserver/eorepo.conf`` file which 
may contain the list of repositories to be enabled.

Restore original NethServer repositories
----------------------------------------

To revert the system configuration to its
initial state and use the original NethServer repositories run ::

  config setprop subscription SystemId '' Secret ''
  signal-event software-repos-save

Enable extra repositories in subscription
-----------------------------------------

If you need to enable an extra repository like NethForge, you can do it by the command line ::

  config setprop subscription ExtraRepositories nethforge
  signal-event software-repos-save

The list of repositories (comma separated : nethforge,repoA,repoB) must match a valid repository definition list in `/etc/yum.repos.d`. 
Beware it is case sensitive.

Events
======

* ``nethserver-subscription-update`` standard update event; it runs on new 
  installation and subsequent updates
* ``nethserver-subscription-save`` runs when the registration token is set from 
  the UI, altering the YUM repository configuration
* ``restore-yumrepos`` runs during ``pre-restore-config`` event. Actions and
  templates bound to it run in a temporary environment where the
  ``configuration`` DB is extracted from the configuration backup and temporarily
  applied to the system. It occurs before automatic installation of packages 
  from the backup set. It is the point where the YUM configuration is restored to 
  make subscribed repositories immediately available.


Alerts
======

Collectd listens for notification on a well known socket: ``/var/run/collectd.sock``.

Notifications can be generated by Collectd thresholds, cron jobs or even external daemons like *NMS*.

Collectd thresholds
-------------------

You can trigger an alarm named ``testalarm`` from command line: ::

  echo -e "PUTNOTIF host=$(hostname) type=custom type_instance=testalarm severity=failure time=$(date +%s) message=\"$1 FAILURE\"" | nc -U /var/run/collectd.sock &>/dev/null

You can also resolve the above alarm: ::

  echo -e "PUTNOTIF host=$(hostname) type=custom type_instance=testalarm severity=okay time=$(date +%s) message=\"$1 OK\"" | nc -U /var/run/collectd.sock &>/dev/null


Adding a threshold configuration
--------------------------------

Create a ``/etc/collectd.d/threshold.conf`` template fragment using collectd threshold syntax. Enjoy collectd docs here https://collectd.org/documentation/manpages/collectd-threshold.5.shtml


Collectd python plugin
----------------------

The `nethserver_alerts.py` file implements a Collectd plugin. 
The plugin dispatches each notification to remote Dartagnan instance.
If the remote Dartagnan instance is not available, the plugin will save the notifications inside a local queue
and will retry to resend them later.

Plugin options (inside ``/etc/collectd.d/threshold.conf``):

- ``api_url`` URL where alerts will be dispatched
- ``lk``: System ID
- ``secret``: (optional) if set, the secret will be used as authorization token
- ``debug``: enable the debug, can be ``yes`` or ``no``. Default to ``no``


NethServer Monitor Services (NMS)
---------------------------------

NMS is a python daemon which monitor the status of all services registered inside the configuration db.
Each service is checked every 300 seconds, if the status of a service changes, NMS writes a notification to Collectd socket.


Inventory
=========

The inventory uses the ``facter`` software, from puppet
(https://docs.puppet.com/facter/). Facter collects a standard set of
informations (like CPU model, runing kernel, etc.) but the system also gather
some custom ``facts``.

Custom facts
------------

Scripts for custom facts are inside
``/opt/puppetlabs/puppet/lib/ruby/2.1.0/facter/`` directory. Each package can
register a new custom fact, but this packages always provides the following:

- ``rpms``, list of installed RPMs
- ``raid``, RAID configuration
- ``templates_custom``, list of configured template custom wihout content
- ``arp_macs``, number of network devices
- ``users``, list of configured users
- ``backup``, info about backup status
- ``esmithdb``, all esmith databases, password values are replaced with ``***``

Sending the inventory
---------------------

Make sure that ``SystemId`` property under ``subscription`` key is already set.
If the ``Secret`` property is set, it will be used as authorization token when
sending the inventory.

The inventory will be sent every day using cron. If you want to manually send
the inventory, use the following command: ::

  /etc/cron.daily/nethserver-inventory
